# Having fun with nuts ü•úüå∞üêøÔ∏è & garbage collecting üóëÔ∏è üöÆ

### Introduction to Embedded Scripting Languages:

**This blog is aimed at those with some understanding of memory management in
programming languages and those curious about what a garbage collector is.**

First contact: Squrriel. Recently I started working on a code base that was
littered with files ended in a strange extension like .nut. Obviously having the
humour of a 12 year old, I proceeded to tell my friends all about this hilarious
language that I'd love to pair with some [coq](https://github.com/coq/coq) üêì.

Jokes aside, I really was wondering **what was the purpose of a garbage
collected language in an embedded systems environment?**

As a newbie to embedded systems programming, I had a few preconceptions about
the field. Especially in the case of writing firmware for IoT devices.

I generally thought of embedded devices as:

<div style="text-align: center;">
    <img src="/images/2_emb_class.jpeg" style="width: 50%;" alt="Class guide">
</div>

Low power ans low cost and not.

When you are not low power and you can eat at places with `$$$` on google maps,
feel free to throw processing power at the problem, put Linux or Android on the
device and lots of RAM and run java (please don't).

If constrained by low cost and low power, you are usually limited to bare metal
or RTOS in C/C++.

For the rest, it is probably a specific combination of hardware and software
that's not really the focus right now.

All in all, the idea of having a garbage collected language run on IoT devices
seemed pretty sacrilegious.

## Whats embedded scripting?

Essentially embedded scripting languages serve as the cornerstone for enhancing
the programmability and flexibility of embedded systems.

> **"Squirrel** is a high level imperative, **object-oriented programming
> language,** designed to be a light-weight scripting language that fits in the
> size, memory bandwidth, and real-time requirements of applications like
> **video games**."

Just reading what [squirrel-lang](https://squirrel-lang.org/) says about Squirrel
lang seemed oxymoronic to me so it prodded me to take a closer look as to why it
serves its purpose and serves it well.

Even wihout being ultra-lean code like bare metal C to function efficiently,
languages such as Squirrel and Lua showcase being an impressive blend of being
lightweight while simultaneously offering a rich set of features.

This unique combination allows for a more dynamic and customizable approach to
embedded system development, enabling both developers and end-users to explore a
broader range of functionalities without compromising on performance or resource
utilization.

First thing to debunk - embedded scripting languages don't add as much bloat as
I has originally thought. Squirrel can be as little as 100-150KB and Lua is down
to a shocking 63K!

We all know how easy it is to protoype something out in python and essentially,
embedded scripting langugage support that (any many other purposes). One of the
most significant advantages of embedded scripting languages is their ability to
make embedded systems more adaptable and interactive.

For instance, in the realm of video game development, these languages allow for
rapid iteration of game logic and user interfaces, enabling developers to
implement changes without the need for recompilation. This flexibility is not
only a bonus for developers but also enhances the gaming experience by allowing
for real-time game modifications and customizations.

## Discovering Squirrel

As I delved deeper into the world of embedded scripting languages, Lua was a
familiar companion, thanks to my adventures in Minecraft modding and tinkering
with my Neovim setup. However, Squirrel was a novel encounter, a language I
hadn't crossed paths with before. This piqued my curiosity: **Why does Squirrel
exist?**

Alberto Demichelis, the creator of Squirrel, found his inspiration while
integrating Lua at CryTek, a game development company. Lua, for all its
strengths, presented a challenge with its garbage collector's unpredictability,
which could potentially hamper real-time performance‚Äîa critical aspect in
gaming. Lua's approach to garbage collection, though somewhat manageable through
the `lua_gc()` function, required fine-tuning of the step size argument to
mitigate performance impacts. This setting varied widely across projects and
needed adjustments with project evolution.

In an effort to circumvent these issues, Demichelis explored implementing
reference counting in Lua. This method aimed to eliminate the need for periodic
memory scans by the collector, instead tracking object ownership through
reference counts and releasing objects when no longer referenced. However, the
extensive modifications needed led him to consider a fresh start. Thus, Squirrel
was born out of the desire to create a language that addressed Lua's
limitations, including its unconventional syntax, which often left co-workers
puzzled over basic constructs like a for-loop, and its relatively limited
feature set.

Squirrel was designed from the ground up to tackle these challenges, offering a
solution that blends the ease of embedded scripting with improvements in garbage
collection, syntax familiarity, and an enriched set of features. This innovative
approach allows Squirrel to fill a unique niche in the embedded scripting
landscape, particularly appealing to those in the game development sphere
seeking a more predictable and developer-friendly language.

## Some comparisons

I think its hard to frame the position of Squirrel without comparing a more
familiar Lua.

Design and Performance: Squirrel vs. Lua At its core, Squirrel shares a
spiritual lineage with Lua. Both languages are built atop a register-based
virtual machine (VM), showcasing their efficiency and adaptability in embedding
within C and C++ programs. This foundational similarity extends to their
compactness and the ability to manage multiple VMs independently, making them
highly versatile in various programming contexts. However, Squirrel
distinguishes itself through its implementation and language features.

While Lua is penned in C, Squirrel ventures a step further into modern
programming paradigms with its implementation in C++, offering a C API that
mirrors Lua's stack-based approach. This strategic choice allows Squirrel to
integrate seamlessly into projects, providing developers the flexibility to
modify the language source directly if necessary. Both languages maintain a
minimal footprint, with their compiled forms hovering around the 100-150
kilobyte mark, demonstrating their lightweight nature.

Performance discussions often highlight Lua's edge in microbenchmarks,
attributed to its streamlined bytecode processing and strategic memory
management during benchmarking. Squirrel, despite being slightly slower in these
microbenchmarks, introduces more data types and language features, enriching the
developer's toolkit. The trade-off lies in Squirrel's approach to memory
management. Through reference counting, Squirrel ensures a consistent,
predictable overhead in memory management, crucial for applications like video
games where timing is everything.

## Real-World Performance Considerations

Demichelis emphasizes the importance of assessing language performance within
real application scenarios, where factors like memory management, cache misses,
and memory aliasing play significant roles. Squirrel's design prioritizes
predictable memory management costs and efficient data structures to mitigate
these issues. Innovations in memory management within Squirrel's ecosystem, such
as optimizing for cache friendliness and leveraging OS-level memory alignment,
have shown to significantly boost performance in stress tests mimicking game
loops.

In essence, Squirrel's development philosophy centers around providing a robust,
feature-rich scripting language that addresses the specific needs of real-time
applications. Its approach to predictable memory management and performance
optimization underscores its suitability for scenarios where timing and resource
efficiency are paramount. As we delve deeper into Squirrel, it becomes clear
that its existence is not merely to serve as an alternative to Lua but to offer
unique solutions to the nuanced challenges of embedded and real-time
programming.

## Garbage Collection in Squirrel

Now I'm going to foray into the thing that has intrigued me the most & inspired
me to go down this rabbit-hole in the first place - a garbage collector on
embedded systems.

### Why does garbage collecting affect performance anyways?

First thing to keep in mind is that, even without garbage collection, a program
typically needs to allocate and free memory (unless you're trying to make it to
the MITRE CVE leaderboard!). Garbage collection will allow the 'free'-ing half
of the process to happen in batches, ideally when the program is relatievly idle
or not encroaching on CPU bound tasks.

You'd want to batch together these operations to reduce the overhead of
syscalls. If you happen to have a lot of memory spare, some collectors might
even defer to free till the end of the program!

The collector has to still spend resources analysing what is *reachable*.

Simply put, ‚Äúreachable‚Äù values are those that are accessible or usable somehow.
They are guaranteed to be stored in memory.

There‚Äôs a base set of inherently reachable values, that cannot be deleted for
obvious reasons.

For instance:

- The currently executing function, its local variables and parameters.
- Other functions on the current chain of nested calls, their local variables
  and parameters.
- Global variables. (there are some other, internal ones as well)

Typically we can achieve this using reference counting. Determining what is
reachable is the real performance penalty. Additionally, this process does tend
to briefly interrupt normal execution.

The interruptions can especially be a significant factor in applications that
are sensitive to latency issues. This happens to include the common scenario of
serving web content. Fortunately, there are also now garbage collector modes to
reduce this impact.

The result is for most garbage collected platforms, the collector is one factor
to consider when evaluating performance. The net effect of the garbage collector
may be minimal ‚Äî or even a net positive! ‚Äî over the life of an application
session, but there can short-lived periods where there is significant negative
impact, and it's important to be aware of how to mitigate those issues.

## Under the hood: A look at how the trash man operates

I'm not going to let it go out withotu peeking under the hood and since the
codebase for Squirrel is small enough, I think its a good way to study how a
garbage collector can be implemented.

## Core Components:

### 1. **Reference Counting:**

- Implemented via `SQRefCounted` structure.
- Every collectable object has a reference count (`_uiRef`).
- `Release()` method decreases the reference count and deletes the object if it
  reaches zero.
  ```cpp
      struct SQRefCounted
    {
        SQUnsignedInteger _uiRef; // Reference count
        virtual ~SQRefCounted() {}
        virtual void Release()=0; // Decreases the reference count and deletes the object if it reaches zero.
    };
  ```

### 2. **Mark-and-Sweep:**

- Enabled by defining `NO_GARBAGE_COLLECTOR` to include GC-related code.
- `SQCollectable` extends `SQRefCounted`, adding `_next`, `_prev`, for chaining
  collectable objects, and a mark flag (`MARK_FLAG`).
- `AddToChain()` and `RemoveFromChain()` manage collectables in a global chain.
- During the mark phase, `Mark()` is recursively called on objects to set the
  mark flag.
- `UnMark()` clears the mark flag for the sweep phase.
- Sweep phase finalizes and deletes unmarked (unreachable) objects.
  ```cpp
    struct SQCollectable : public SQRefCounted {
        SQCollectable *_next, *_prev; // For chaining collectable objects
        virtual void Mark(SQCollectable **chain)=0; // Marks objects recursively
        void UnMark(); // Clears the mark flag
        virtual void Finalize()=0; // Finalizes the object
        static void AddToChain(SQCollectable **chain, SQCollectable *c); // Adds objects to a global chain
        static void RemoveFromChain(SQCollectable **chain, SQCollectable *c); // Removes objects from the chain
    };

  ```

## Implementation Details:

### Mark Phase:

- Initiated by `SQSharedState::RunMark()`, marking root objects and recursively
  marking reachable objects.
- Each collectable type (e.g., `SQArray`, `SQTable`, `SQClass`, etc.) implements
  its own `Mark()` method to mark its references.
- `MarkObject()` function is used to dispatch the mark call based on object
  type.
  ```cpp
  struct SQSharedState
  {
      void RunMark(SQVM *vm, SQCollectable **tchain); // Initiates the marking phase
      SQInteger CollectGarbage(SQVM *vm); // Performs garbage collection, combining mark and sweep phases
      static void MarkObject(SQObjectPtr &o, SQCollectable **chain); // Dispatches mark calls based on object type
  };
  ```

### Sweep Phase:

- `CollectGarbage()` method in `SQSharedState` triggers garbage collection,
  integrating both mark and sweep phases.
- Performed in `SQSharedState::CollectGarbage()`, iterating through the global
  chain of collectable objects.
- It finalizes and releases objects not marked (i.e., unreachable).
  ```cpp
  SQInteger SQSharedState::CollectGarbage(SQVM *vm)
  {
      SQInteger n = 0; // Counter for collected objects
      SQCollectable *tchain = NULL;

      RunMark(vm, &tchain); // Mark phase

      // Sweep phase: Iterate over collectables and delete unmarked objects
      SQCollectable *t = _gc_chain;
      while(t) {
          if (!(t->_uiRef & MARK_FLAG)) { // If object is unmarked
              SQCollectable *next = t->_next;
              if (--t->_uiRef == 0) t->Release(); // Delete if reference count is zero
              t = next;
          } else {
              t->UnMark(); // Clear mark for next GC cycle
              t = t->_next;
          }
          n++;
      }
      _gc_chain = tchain; // Update chain for next cycle

      return n; // Return number of collected objects
  }

  ```

### Reference Table (`RefTable`):

- Manages references to objects, used for adding, releasing, and getting the
  reference count.
- Supports mark phase by marking all objects it holds references to.
  ```cpp
  struct RefTable {
      void Mark(SQCollectable **chain); // Marks all objects it holds references to
      // Other methods omitted for brevity
  };
  void RefTable::Mark(SQCollectable **chain)
  {
      RefNode *nodes = _nodes;
      for (SQUnsignedInteger n = 0; n < _numofslots; ++n, ++nodes) {
          if (sq_type(nodes->obj) != OT_NULL) {
              SQSharedState::MarkObject(nodes->obj, chain); // Mark the object
          }
      }
  }

  ```

Closing words: Hope you've learnt something! I found this rabbit hole pretty eye
opening because I had previously black box'ed GCs and never really took a look
under the hood. This was a gentle introduction to them and I hope I have the
chance to circle back to see how more sophisticated ones operate. Till next
time!
