# Welcome to My Personal Website!

Hi there! I'm Amit, a budding computer engineering student at the National
University of Singapore. My journey in this field is driven by a deep passion
for understanding the intricate layers of software systems and the art of
pragmatic engineering. The world of computer science is vast and endlessly
fascinating – so much so that I often find myself thinking about the sheer
volume of knowledge out there that I might never fully explore. But that's the
beauty of it, isn't it?

In this vast sea of information, every bit I learn is a treasure. Whether it's a
new programming language, a complex algorithm, or the latest development in AI,
each discovery fuels my curiosity and eagerness to learn more. I believe in the
power of sharing knowledge – what I pick up along my path, I want to put out
there for others. The idea is simple: as I walk this journey, I lay down a trail
of insights and learnings, hoping that others can sprint where I've strolled.

What Excites Me in Work

I thrive on tackling 'cool problems' – those that make me pause and go, “Wow,
that's something!” What makes a problem cool? Well, it's a bit of a mixed bag
for me. I'm relatively new to this field, so I'm always pleasantly surprised by
what captures my imagination. Here are a few things that have sparked my
interest:

Computer Science at its Core: Anything that roots deeply in or cleverly applies
computer science principles catches my attention. Pushing My Boundaries: I love
challenges that stretch my knowledge, be it learning something entirely new or
applying recently acquired concepts. Impactful Work: Whether it's making life
easier for fellow developers and software users or contributing to broader
social or global issues, I'm all in. Open Source Contributions: There's
something genuinely exhilarating about contributing to the open-source
community. Balancing Act: I appreciate work that mixes grand, complex problems
with achievable, quick wins. Smart People, Great Environment

For me, the people I work with are as important as the work itself. I gravitate
towards smart, insightful individuals who are also pleasant and collaborative. I
don’t have a strict preference for a specific type or size of organization –
what matters most is being surrounded by mentors who are both empowering and
supportive.
